Personal Cryptographic Architecture (PCA) Version 1.2
Request for Comments Style Specification

Status of This Memo

   This document specifies PCA version 1.2.  It is written in the
   style of an RFC for implementers, auditors, and protocol reviewers.
   It is not an IETF publication.

   This specification is normative unless a section is explicitly
   marked as non-normative.

Abstract

   Personal Cryptographic Architecture (PCA) is a deterministic
   personal key architecture for managing public identities, generated
   secrets, and protected external secrets from a single offline Master
   Secret.  PCA does not define new cryptographic primitives.  It
   defines a stable composition of existing primitives, canonical
   derivation paths, separation between identity and encryption domains,
   and revocation and migration rules.

Table of Contents

   1.  Conventions and Terminology
   2.  Design Goals
   3.  Architecture
   4.  Master Secret and Trust Root
   5.  Namespace
   6.  HKDF and Canonical Paths
   7.  Naming, Encoding, and Serialization
   8.  Identity Branch
   9.  Email Identity
   10. Encrypt Branch
   11. Generation Branch
   12. Vault Branch
   13. Lifecycle
   14. Security Model
   15. Recommended Algorithms
   16. Protocol Migration
   17. Emergency Revocation
   18. Domain Binding and External Discovery
   19. Future Extensions
   Appendix A. Design Philosophy
   Appendix B. PCA and BIP32
   Appendix C. OpenPGP Delayed Binding

1.  Conventions and Terminology

1.1.  Normative Keywords

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL",
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in BCP 14, RFC 2119 and RFC 8174, when, and only when, they appear
   in all capitals, as shown here.

   A PCA implementation that violates a MUST or MUST NOT requirement is
   not compliant with PCA v1.2.

1.2.  Terminology

   Master Secret:
      The only permanent root secret of a PCA system.  It is 512 bits
      of CSPRNG output and cannot be recovered if lost.

   Namespace:
      The top-level isolation identifier for a PCA instance.  It is
      used as the salt in every HKDF operation and binds emergency
      revocation scope.

   TrustRootKey:
      The logical root key derived from the Master Secret by
      HKDF-SHA-512 using the reserved info path "PCA/V1/TrustRoot".

   Canonical Info Path:
      The ASCII context string used as HKDF info.  Canonical Info Paths
      are stable, case-sensitive, and cryptographically significant.

   Persona:
      A public identity namespace such as Personal, Work, Alice, or
      Anonymous.  Different Personas are independent public identities.

   Identity:
      A branch or node used for public trust, authentication, and
      digital signatures.

   Generation:
      A branch used to deterministically generate recoverable secrets.
      Generation does not establish public trust.

   Vault:
      A branch used to protect external secrets and files.  Vault keys
      are recoverable, but Vault ciphertext is not recoverable if lost.

   Emergency Revocation Key:
      An Ed25519 key pair generated independently of the Master Secret.
      It is used only to declare a Namespace revoked after Master Secret
      compromise or an equivalent disaster.

   Infrastructure Identity:
      The identity at path "Identity/V1/PCA".  Its public key and full
      Canonical Info Path are hard-coded or equivalently preconfigured
      as the trust anchor for PCA-internal verification.

2.  Design Goals

   PCA has the following goals:

   *  Single Root of Trust: a PCA instance has one Master Secret.

   *  Deterministic Recovery: derived keys can be recomputed from the
      Master Secret, Namespace, and Canonical Info Paths.

   *  Minimal Persistent Secrets: except for the Master Secret,
      emergency revocation private key, and external Vault ciphertext,
      protocol secrets need not be stored long term.

   *  Separation of Responsibilities: Identity, Generation, and Vault
      have non-overlapping duties.

   *  Least Disclosure: identities are anonymous by default and are
      linked only by explicit disclosure.

   *  Capability Isolation: compromise of a child key MUST NOT enable
      recovery of its parent key or sibling keys.

   *  Long-Term Evolvability: protocol migration is supported without
      confusing protocol upgrades with Namespace revocation.

3.  Architecture

3.1.  Key Tree Overview

   PCA derives a tree from one Master Secret:

      Master Secret (512-bit random)
         |
         v
      TrustRootKey = HKDF-SHA-512(..., info="PCA/V1/TrustRoot")
         |
         +-- Identity branch
         |      +-- Identity/V1/PCA
         |      +-- Identity/V1/<Persona>/...
         |
         +-- Encrypt branch
                +-- Encrypt/V1/Generation/...
                +-- Encrypt/V1/Vault/...

   The Identity branch is for public trust.  The Encrypt branch is for
   secrets and file protection.  Keys from the Encrypt branch MUST NOT
   be used to establish public identity.

3.2.  Security Domains

   PCA has three independent security domains:

      Identity:
         Establishes public identity and trust.  Uses Ed25519 in v1.2.

      Generation:
         Deterministically generates recoverable secrets.  It does not
         publish trust anchors or certificates.

      Vault:
         Protects external secrets and files.  Vault ciphertext itself
         is not recoverable from the Master Secret.

   Implementations MUST keep these responsibilities separated.  Identity
   MUST NOT be used as a secret-storage mechanism.  Generation MUST NOT
   establish public trust.  Vault MUST NOT generate unrelated secrets.

4.  Master Secret and Trust Root

4.1.  Master Secret Generation

   The Master Secret MUST be exactly 512 bits generated by a
   cryptographically secure random number generator.

   The Master Secret MUST be the only permanent root secret in the PCA
   derivation hierarchy.

4.2.  Master Secret Storage

   The Master Secret MUST be stored offline.  It MUST NOT participate in
   ordinary online business operations.  It MUST NOT be transmitted to,
   stored by, or processed in a networked service as part of normal use.

   Recommended storage media include durable offline media, an HSM,
   geographically separated backups, or a bank safe deposit box.

   If the Master Secret is disclosed, an attacker can recompute the PCA
   key hierarchy.  The protection level for the Master Secret therefore
   MUST be higher than for any derived key.

4.3.  Emergency Revocation Key

   At system initialization, implementations MUST generate an Ed25519
   Emergency Revocation Key pair independently of the Master Secret.

   The emergency private key MUST be generated with independent CSPRNG
   output and MUST NOT be derived from the Master Secret or any PCA
   derived key.

   The emergency private key MUST be stored physically separately from
   the Master Secret.

   The emergency public key SHOULD be hard-coded in verifier software or
   delivered in a trusted update/configuration package whose integrity
   and origin are protected by code signing or an equivalent mechanism.

4.4.  TrustRootKey

   The TrustRootKey MUST be derived as follows:

      TrustRootKey = HKDF-SHA-512(
        IKM  = Master Secret,
        salt = Namespace,
        info = "PCA/V1/TrustRoot",
        L    = 64
      )

   "PCA/V1/TrustRoot" is a reserved Canonical Info Path.  It MUST NOT
   be used for Identity, Generation, Vault, CRL, migration, or
   application-defined nodes.  It MUST remain stable for the lifetime of
   the "PCA-v1/<NamespaceID>" namespace format family.

   TrustRootKey need not be stored and MAY be recomputed when required.

4.5.  Infrastructure Trust Anchor

   In addition to the emergency public key, compliant verifier
   implementations MUST hard-code or equivalently preconfigure the
   public key and full Canonical Info Path for "Identity/V1/PCA".

   This key is the trust anchor for PCA-internal verification, including
   CRLs, software update signatures, protocol migration statements, and
   other internal authorization decisions.

5.  Namespace

5.1.  Namespace Function

   A Namespace is the highest-level isolation boundary for a PCA
   instance.  It is used as the HKDF salt in all deterministic
   derivations and defines the sole scope of emergency revocation.

   Different Namespaces MUST be treated as completely independent.
   Trust anchors, certificates, CRLs, revocation statements, and
   compatibility states from one Namespace MUST NOT automatically apply
   to any other Namespace.

5.2.  Namespace Syntax

   A PCA v1 Namespace has this form:

      PCA-v1/<NamespaceID>

   NamespaceID MUST be exactly 256 bits of CSPRNG output encoded as
   64 uppercase hexadecimal characters.

   Example:

      PCA-v1/A980E2656D5D0349012434FF624506C9650187D1F4B897D20D0E0918B1E1186E

   The "PCA-v1" prefix identifies the namespace format family.  It is
   not, by itself, a protocol migration marker.

5.3.  Namespace Lifetime

   A PCA instance has exactly one active Namespace.  All HKDF operations
   in that instance MUST use the same Namespace string as salt.

   Ordinary protocol upgrades MUST NOT be interpreted as automatic
   Namespace replacement.  A new Namespace is used only when a later
   specification explicitly requires namespace isolation, or when the
   system is rebuilt after Master Secret compromise or an equivalent
   disaster.

5.4.  Revocation Scope

   Emergency revocation applies only to the value in the "namespace"
   field of the revocation statement.

   If a Namespace is validly revoked, it is permanently dead.  A rebuilt
   system MUST use a new Master Secret and a new Namespace.  Old
   emergency revocation keys, certificate chains, and revocation state
   MUST NOT carry over to the new Namespace.

6.  HKDF and Canonical Paths

6.1.  HKDF Primitive

   PCA v1.2 uses HKDF-SHA-512 for all deterministic derivation.
   Implementations MUST use the same inputs for the same node:

      IKM  = Parent Key
      salt = Namespace
      info = Canonical Info Path

   For identical IKM, salt, info, and output length, implementations
   MUST produce identical output bytes.

6.2.  Canonical Info Path Syntax

   Canonical Info Paths MUST be non-empty US-ASCII strings.  They MUST
   contain only characters from this set:

      A-Z a-z 0-9 / -

   A path MUST NOT contain Unicode characters, spaces, control
   characters, empty components, a leading slash, or a trailing slash.
   Paths are case-sensitive.

   Protocol paths have this structure:

      Branch/Version/Object...

   Branch in PCA v1.2 MUST be "Identity", "Encrypt", or reserved "PCA".
   Version MUST be "V" followed by one or more decimal digits, such as
   "V1".

6.3.  Hierarchical Derivation

   To derive a protocol path from the Master Secret, implementations
   MUST:

   1.  Derive TrustRootKey as specified in Section 4.4.

   2.  Split the target protocol path into slash-separated components.

   3.  Starting with the first three components, derive each prefix from
       the current parent key using HKDF-SHA-512 with the full prefix as
       the Canonical Info Path.

   4.  Continue until the complete target path has been derived.

   For example, deriving:

      Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026/Laptop

   uses these info paths in order after TrustRootKey:

      Identity/V1/Personal
      Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026
      Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026/Laptop

   Descendant derivation from a known parent key MUST use the same rule
   starting immediately below the supplied parent path.  A target path
   MUST be equal to or below the supplied parent path; otherwise the
   derivation MUST be rejected.

6.4.  Output Lengths

   Implementations MUST use the following output lengths:

      Ed25519 private seed:
         32 bytes.  Use the first 32 bytes of HKDF output as the seed.

      XChaCha20-Poly1305 key:
         32 bytes.  Use the first 32 bytes of HKDF output.

      BIP32 master seed:
         64 bytes.  Use the full 64-byte HKDF output directly.

      SHA-256 fingerprint or hash:
         32 bytes, standard SHA-256 output.

   HKDF output for intermediate nodes SHOULD be 64 bytes.

6.5.  Path Stability

   Once a Canonical Info Path has a defined meaning, that meaning MUST
   NOT be changed.  New semantics MUST be introduced with a new path,
   such as a new version segment.

7.  Naming, Encoding, and Serialization

7.1.  Naming Rules

   Named object components SHOULD use CamelCase.  Examples include:

      PasswordManager
      Vault
      DocumentSigning
      CodeSigning
      EmailCa
      LongTermIdentity

   Components that are version labels, decimal counters, or encoded
   random identifiers MAY use their specified syntax instead of
   CamelCase.

   The only hierarchy separator is "/".  Other separators MUST NOT be
   used to represent path hierarchy.

7.2.  Encodings

   Namespace IDs, Email IDs, File IDs, hashes, and fingerprints MUST use
   uppercase hexadecimal when encoded as hexadecimal strings.

   External metadata strings SHOULD be UTF-8.  Strings that participate
   in cryptographic computation MUST use their specified byte encoding.
   Canonical Info Paths MUST be encoded exactly as US-ASCII bytes.

7.3.  JSON Canonicalization

   Any JSON data structure that is digitally signed in PCA, including
   CRLs, revocation statements, protocol migration statements, and
   certificate metadata, MUST be serialized using RFC 8785 JSON
   Canonicalization Scheme (JCS) before signing.

   Signature calculation MUST be performed over the exact UTF-8 byte
   stream produced by JCS serialization.  The "signature" field, when
   present, MUST be excluded from the serialized object being signed.

8.  Identity Branch

8.1.  Purpose and Algorithm

   The Identity branch establishes public trust.  PCA v1.2 identity
   keys use Ed25519.  Identity private seeds MUST be the first 32 bytes
   of the derived key material for the relevant Identity path.

8.2.  IdentityRoot, Infrastructure Identity, and Persona

   IdentityRoot is a logical offline root for signing the PCA
   infrastructure identity and Personas.  Its private key MUST never be
   publicly disclosed.  Its public key SHOULD NOT be published by
   default, to avoid linking independent Personas.

   "Identity/V1/PCA" is the PCA infrastructure identity.  Its public key
   and path MUST be hard-coded or equivalently preconfigured in
   compliant verifier software as the PCA-internal trust anchor.

   "Identity/V1/PCA" MUST NOT be used as a personal, work, email, or
   other externally public user identity.

   A Persona is a logical public identity space.  Examples:

      Identity/V1/Personal
      Identity/V1/Work
      Identity/V1/Anonymous

   A Persona MAY issue child Identity nodes such as:

      Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026
      Identity/V1/Personal/IdentityLongTerm

   Different Personas SHOULD be treated as independent public
   identities.

8.3.  Device and Purpose Identities

   Identity nodes MAY issue device or purpose identities, for example:

      Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026/Laptop
      Identity/V1/Work/Identity2026/CodeSigning
      Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026/EmailCa

8.4.  Certificate Chains

   Child public keys MAY be signed by parent identity keys to form a
   certificate chain.

   For external public identities, verifiers MUST verify signatures
   step by step and use an out-of-band trusted Persona, Identity node,
   or other public parent identity as the trust starting point.  External
   verification MUST NOT require public disclosure of IdentityRoot.

   For PCA-internal infrastructure, verifiers MUST trace the certificate
   chain to the hard-coded "Identity/V1/PCA" trust anchor.

8.5.  Infrastructure Verification

   Internal authorization decisions, including Vault authorization,
   Generation authorization, CRL verification, software update
   signatures, and protocol migration signatures, MUST rely only on a
   certificate chain ending at the hard-coded "Identity/V1/PCA" trust
   anchor.

   Internal verification MUST NOT query DNS and MUST NOT use DNS TXT,
   WKD, HTTPS hosting, or other external discovery results as an
   authorization source.

9.  Email Identity

9.1.  Ephemeral Email Identity

   By default, every email MUST use a fresh independent ephemeral
   Ed25519 key pair.

   The derivation path is:

      Identity/V1/<Persona>/<IdentityNode>/Email/Ephemeral/<RandomEmailId>

   RandomEmailId MUST be a one-time 256-bit CSPRNG value encoded as
   uppercase hexadecimal.

   The ephemeral key MUST be used only to sign the current email.
   Implementations SHOULD destroy the private key from memory after
   signing.

9.2.  Delayed Binding

   If a sender later wants to prove that one or more ephemeral emails
   belong to a public identity, the sender MUST NOT create a centralized
   PCA-specific identity list.

   Instead, the sender MUST use an OpenPGP cross-signature certificate
   compatible with RFC 4880, using a Subkey Binding signature or a
   Third-party/Generic Certification signature.

   The normal flow is:

   1.  Generate the ephemeral email key.

   2.  Sign the email with the ephemeral private key.

   3.  Use a long-term parent identity, such as
       Identity/V1/Personal/Identity2026, to issue an OpenPGP
       certification signature over the ephemeral public key.

   4.  Distribute the detached proof through an independent channel,
       such as a second email, removable media, instant messaging, or
       in-person exchange.

   The OpenPGP certification material MUST include the ephemeral public
   key fingerprint, signature creation time, and appropriate key flags
   or certification semantics.

9.3.  Delayed Binding Verification

   Verifiers SHOULD:

   1.  Verify the email signature with the ephemeral public key.

   2.  If a detached binding proof is available, parse and verify it
       with a standard OpenPGP implementation.

   3.  If the parent public key is not already trusted, prompt the user
       to establish trust out of band.

   4.  Treat DNS discovery only as optional external discovery.  DNS
       MUST NOT replace mathematical signature verification or
       out-of-band trust establishment.

   If no trusted binding proof is available, the email MAY be accepted
   only as an anonymous signature.

9.4.  Parent Signer Flexibility

   A delayed-binding parent signer need not be a PCA-derived Identity
   node.  Any RFC 4880 compatible parent key MAY sign the ephemeral key.

   Verifiers MUST verify only the mathematical relation between the
   parent public key and the OpenPGP signature, then apply their own
   out-of-band trust policy.  Verifiers MUST NOT require the parent key
   to exist inside the PCA Namespace and MUST NOT use DNS or external
   discovery to make automatic trust decisions.

9.5.  Ring Signatures

   Implementations MAY support ring signatures, such as CLSAG, as an
   optional anonymity extension.  Ring signatures are not REQUIRED in
   PCA v1.2, and their concrete formats are left to higher-layer
   specifications.

10.  Encrypt Branch

   The Encrypt branch establishes no public trust.  It contains:

      Encrypt/V1/Generation/...
      Encrypt/V1/Vault/...

   EncryptRoot and its descendants do not need long-term storage because
   they can be recomputed from the Master Secret.  Encrypt branch keys
   MUST NOT be used as public identity keys.

11.  Generation Branch

11.1.  Purpose

   Generation is used for deterministic secrets that can be recomputed.
   Generation keys do not need long-term storage and MUST NOT establish
   public trust.

11.2.  Paths

   Generation paths MUST be under:

      Encrypt/V1/Generation/

   Examples:

      Encrypt/V1/Generation/PasswordManager
      Encrypt/V1/Generation/Bitcoin/Mainnet
      Encrypt/V1/Generation/APIKeys/GitHub

11.3.  Rotation

   For versioned or parallel secrets, implementations SHOULD rotate by
   adding path components rather than changing an existing path meaning.

   Example:

      Encrypt/V1/Generation/PasswordManager/2025

11.4.  Bitcoin Wallets

   PCA does not redefine Bitcoin wallet standards.  PCA only specifies
   generation of the Bitcoin root seed.

   For Bitcoin:

      Path: Encrypt/V1/Generation/Bitcoin/Mainnet
      Output: 64 bytes
      Use: BIP32 Master Seed

   The 512-bit HKDF output MUST be used directly as the BIP32 Master
   Seed.  Subsequent wallet derivation SHOULD follow BIP32 and related
   standards such as BIP44 or BIP84.

   PCA does not require BIP39 mnemonics, because the Master Secret is
   already the system recovery entry point.

12.  Vault Branch

12.1.  Purpose

   Vault protects external secrets and files.  Vault keys can be
   recovered from the Master Secret, Namespace, and paths.  Vault
   ciphertext cannot be recreated if lost.

12.2.  Permission Tree

   Vault permission nodes are under:

      Encrypt/V1/Vault/

   Examples:

      Encrypt/V1/Vault/Finance
      Encrypt/V1/Vault/Finance/2026/Q3
      Encrypt/V1/Vault/Company1/Department2/User3

   Different PermissionNodes are independent.  Possession of one node
   key MUST NOT allow recovery of its parent or siblings.

12.3.  File ID

   Every Vault file has a unique File ID.  File ID MUST be:

   *  256 bits.
   *  Generated by a CSPRNG.
   *  Encoded as uppercase hexadecimal.

   Example:

      5C5F68690ACDBC085A1C2E86A1C4A7BE0AFC2B3DB160558BEBB026224A7BD8BD

   The complete file path is:

      Encrypt/V1/Vault/<PermissionPath>/<FileID>

   File ID randomness hides file metadata such as names, numbering, and
   file counts.

12.4.  Per-File Key

   Each file MUST use an independent key.

   The PerFileKey is derived from the PermissionNodeKey using the full
   file Canonical Info Path:

      Encrypt/V1/Vault/<PermissionPath>/<FileID>

   The XChaCha20-Poly1305 key is the first 32 bytes of the derived
   output.

12.5.  Encryption Algorithm and Nonce

   Vault file encryption MUST use XChaCha20-Poly1305.

   The default nonce generation method is RECOMMENDED to be a fresh
   192-bit (24-byte) CSPRNG nonce for each encryption operation.

   Implementations MAY use a deterministic nonce, such as:

      Nonce = HKDF(PerFileKey, "NonceSalt/" + FileID)

   and then use the first 24 bytes as the XChaCha20-Poly1305 nonce.

   Whether random or deterministic nonces are used, implementations MUST
   ensure that the same PermissionNodeKey and FileID pair never reuses a
   nonce for multiple encryption operations.

12.6.  Storage Format

   Vault encrypted data MUST use this byte layout:

      bytes 0..23:   Nonce (24 bytes)
      bytes 24..end: Ciphertext including the 16-byte authentication tag

   Equivalently, the final 16 bytes of the encrypted stream are the
   authentication tag produced by XChaCha20-Poly1305.

   During decryption, implementations MUST read the nonce from bytes
   0..23 and decrypt with the PerFileKey and the AAD specified below.

12.7.  Additional Authenticated Data

   Every XChaCha20-Poly1305 encryption operation in Vault MUST use the
   complete file Canonical Info Path encoded as US-ASCII bytes as AAD.

   Example AAD path:

      Encrypt/V1/Vault/Finance/2026/Q3/5C5F...

   Decryption MUST use the exact same AAD bytes.  If authentication
   fails, the implementation MUST reject the ciphertext and MUST NOT
   output plaintext.

13.  Lifecycle

   The lifecycle requirements are:

      Master Secret:
         Long-term: yes.  Offline: yes.  Recoverable: no.

      Emergency Revocation Private Key:
         Long-term: yes.  Offline: yes.  Recoverable: no.

      TrustRootKey:
         Long-term: no.  Offline: no.  Recoverable: yes.

      IdentityRoot, Persona, Identity node:
         Long-term storage: optional.  Recoverable: yes.

      Ephemeral Email Key:
         Long-term: no.  Destroy after use when practical.

      EncryptRoot, Generation key, VaultRoot:
         Long-term: no.  Recoverable: yes.

      Vault ciphertext:
         Long-term: yes if the protected secret matters.  Recoverable:
         no; only the key can be recovered.

   Short-lived Identity nodes MAY be removed from online storage after
   expiration because they can be recomputed.  The Master Secret MUST
   NOT be destroyed unless the owner intentionally abandons or revokes
   the whole PCA system.

14.  Security Model

14.1.  Assumptions

   PCA assumes:

   *  The Master Secret and emergency revocation private key are
      physically protected.

   *  Implementations do not leak secrets through side channels such as
      timing or cache attacks.

   *  The CSPRNG used for all random material is cryptographically
      secure and appropriate for secret generation.

14.2.  Non-Goals

   PCA does not defend against continued compromise after the Master
   Secret is disclosed.  Emergency revocation can declare the Namespace
   dead, but it cannot prevent an attacker from deriving old keys.

   PCA v1.2 does not defend against a future cryptographically relevant
   quantum computer breaking Ed25519 or ECDLP-based systems.

15.  Recommended Algorithms

   PCA v1.2 uses or recommends:

      Master Secret:              512-bit CSPRNG output
      HKDF:                       HKDF-SHA-512
      Identity:                   Ed25519
      Emergency Revocation:       Ed25519
      Vault Encryption:           XChaCha20-Poly1305
      File Encryption:            XChaCha20-Poly1305
      Bitcoin Wallet Root Seed:   BIP32 Master Seed
      Signed JSON Canonical Form: RFC 8785 JCS

16.  Protocol Migration

16.1.  Protocol Migration vs. Namespace Migration

   Protocol migration means upgrading the PCA specification itself, such
   as algorithm suites, serialization formats, certificate fields,
   verification rules, or infrastructure trust anchors.

   Protocol migration MUST be authorized by a new specification,
   migration statement, or software update package signed by
   "Identity/V1/PCA" or by a migration identity whose chain verifies to
   "Identity/V1/PCA".

   Namespace migration means revoking an old Namespace and establishing
   a new Namespace with a new Master Secret after compromise or an
   equivalent disaster.  Namespace migration is governed by emergency
   revocation.

   These mechanisms MUST NOT be confused:

   *  Protocol upgrades MUST NOT be represented as emergency revocation
      statements.

   *  Emergency revocation statements MUST NOT be used to publish
      ordinary protocol upgrades.

   *  A protocol migration signed by "Identity/V1/PCA" MUST NOT revive,
      override, or narrow an already effective Namespace revocation.

   *  A successor_namespace_hint in a revocation statement MUST NOT be
      interpreted as protocol migration and MUST NOT cause automatic
      trust in the successor Namespace.

16.2.  Trust Continuity

   New protocol trust anchors MUST be signed by the previous trusted
   "Identity/V1/PCA" identity or by an already trusted migration
   identity.

   A verifier evaluating a new protocol version MUST verify the complete
   infrastructure trust chain and confirm that the migration statement
   applies to the protocol range supported by the verifier.

   During migration, old and new protocols MAY coexist.  Existing
   identities need not migrate immediately.  New identities SHOULD use
   the newer protocol version when practical.

   If the new protocol still operates under the same Namespace, the
   Namespace revocation state remains controlled by that Namespace's
   revocation statements.  If the new protocol requires a new Namespace,
   verifiers MUST treat that as Namespace migration and MUST NOT inherit
   trust automatically from the old Namespace.

17.  Emergency Revocation

17.1.  Key Generation and Storage

   Implementations MUST generate an independent Ed25519 emergency
   revocation key pair at initialization.

   The emergency private key MUST be stored physically separately from
   the Master Secret.

   The emergency public key MUST be preconfigured in verifiers, either
   hard-coded in software or delivered through a trusted update or
   configuration package.

17.2.  Revocation Statement

   A revocation statement MUST be a JSON object serialized with RFC 8785
   JCS for signing.

   A revocation statement has these fields:

      version:
         Integer.  MUST be 1.

      namespace:
         String.  REQUIRED.  The only Namespace to which this statement
         applies.

      revoked_at:
         String.  UTC timestamp in the form YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SSZ.

      reason:
         String.  Human-readable reason.

      successor_namespace_hint:
         String.  OPTIONAL.  A hint that a successor Namespace may
         exist.  This field is not a trust anchor.

      signature:
         String.  Base64 Ed25519 signature over the JCS-serialized JSON
         object with the signature field removed.

   Example before adding "signature":

      {
        "version": 1,
        "namespace": "PCA-v1/<NamespaceID>",
        "revoked_at": "2026-07-03T10:00:00Z",
        "reason": "Master Secret Compromised",
        "successor_namespace_hint": "PCA-v2/3F8A..."
      }

   successor_namespace_hint MUST NOT be interpreted as a trust anchor and
   MUST NOT trigger automatic import, automatic switching, or automatic
   trust.

17.3.  Scope Binding

   The "namespace" field is REQUIRED and defines the whole and only
   scope of the revocation statement.

   The emergency private key does not itself represent a Namespace.  A
   revocation statement MUST explicitly bind to one Namespace.

   A verifier receiving a revocation statement MUST first compare the
   statement's "namespace" value with the locally trusted Namespace.  If
   they differ, the verifier MUST immediately ignore the statement and
   MUST NOT perform signature verification or any state-changing action.

   A valid revocation statement applies to all protocol versions under
   that Namespace.  The emergency key is not scoped by min_version or
   max_version.

17.4.  Rebuild After Revocation

   Once a Namespace is validly revoked, it is permanently dead and
   cannot be reactivated.

   To rebuild, the owner MUST:

   1.  Generate a new 512-bit Master Secret.

   2.  Generate a new independent emergency revocation key pair.

   3.  Choose or register a new Namespace ID.

   4.  Derive new identity roots and child identities under the new
       Namespace.

   5.  Distribute new trust anchors through out-of-band or otherwise
       explicitly trusted channels.

17.5.  Broadcast

   A revocation statement SHOULD be distributed through multiple
   channels to resist network partitions and single points of failure.
   Channels MAY include:

   *  https://<domain>/.well-known/pca/revocation.crl

   *  personal websites, social media, mailing lists, and OpenPGP key
      servers.

   *  notarial or blockchain timestamp services for publication-time
      evidence.

17.6.  Verifier Procedure

   Verifiers MUST process revocation statements in this order:

   1.  Namespace Match:
       Compare the statement namespace to the locally trusted Namespace.
       If it differs, stop and ignore the statement.

   2.  Signature Verification:
       Verify the Ed25519 signature using the preconfigured emergency
       public key over the JCS bytes of the statement without the
       signature field.  If invalid, reject.

   3.  Time Check:
       A verifier MAY check revoked_at against a trusted clock.  If the
       timestamp is in the future, the verifier SHOULD warn, but SHOULD
       NOT use clock skew as the only rejection reason.

   4.  Enforcement:
       If verification succeeds, the verifier MUST reject all subsequent
       operations under that Namespace, including new signatures and new
       file decryptions.

   5.  Successor Hint:
       If successor_namespace_hint exists, the verifier SHOULD display
       it prominently, but MUST NOT automatically import, switch to, or
       trust that Namespace.

18.  Domain Binding and External Discovery

18.1.  Scope

   This section applies only to non-native PCA peers or to first-time
   external discovery.  For nodes that already have trust through a
   hard-coded anchor, out-of-band import, or another trusted mechanism,
   this section is OPTIONAL.

   DNS and HTTPS discovery MUST NOT be used for PCA-internal
   authorization.  They MUST NOT replace certificate-chain verification
   and MUST NOT be a trust source for Vault, Generation, CRL, software
   update, or protocol migration decisions.

18.2.  DNS TXT Binding

   A domain administrator SHOULD publish a TXT record to bind a domain
   to a PCA identity public-key hash without exposing personal identity:

      _pca.example.com. 3600 IN TXT
      "pca-binding=<SHA-256(IdentityPublicKey).HEX>"

   A verifier MAY:

   1.  Obtain the sender domain.

   2.  Query _pca.<domain> TXT.

   3.  Compare the record hash with the provided public-key hash.

   DNS results only show that the domain owner published a hash.  The
   verifier MUST still perform mathematical signature verification and
   SHOULD confirm trust in the parent identity out of band.

18.3.  Well-Known CRL Location

   Implementations SHOULD host CRLs at:

      https://<domain>/.well-known/pca/revocation.crl

   The file MUST be UTF-8 encoded JSON.

18.4.  CRL Format

   A CRL JSON object has this form:

      {
        "version": 1,
        "issued_at": "2026-07-03T00:00:00Z",
        "signer_path": "Identity/V1/PCA",
        "revoked_identifiers": [
          "SHA256_IDENTIFIER_HEX"
        ],
        "signature": "Base64_Ed25519_Signature"
      }

   The JSON object without "signature" MUST be JCS-serialized before
   signing.  The signature MUST be Ed25519.

   signer_path MUST be a PCA internal Identity path and MUST be
   "Identity/V1/PCA" or a dedicated revocation sub-identity whose chain
   verifies to "Identity/V1/PCA".

   Each revoked identifier SHOULD be a SHA-256 value encoded as
   uppercase hexadecimal.

18.5.  CRL Verification

   Verifiers MUST process CRLs in this order:

   1.  Fetch:
       Fetch the CRL from the well-known HTTPS URL.  The URL is only
       discovery and transport; it is not authorization.

   2.  Signature:
       JCS-serialize the JSON object without "signature" and verify the
       Ed25519 signature using the key identified by signer_path.  If
       invalid, reject.

   3.  Chain Verification:
       Verify that the signer key traces to the hard-coded
       "Identity/V1/PCA" trust anchor.  If it cannot, reject.

   4.  Identifier Check:
       Check whether the target identifier is in revoked_identifiers.

   CRL verification MUST NOT query DNS and MUST NOT use DNS TXT records
   as signer authorization.

19.  Future Extensions

   Future PCA versions may define:

   *  Master Secret sharding, such as Shamir Secret Sharing or
      SLIP-0039-style threshold backup.

   *  Multi-device synchronization and state management.

   *  HSM integration.

   *  YubiKey, FIDO2, or WebAuthn binding.

   *  Post-quantum algorithms.

   *  Zero-knowledge identity proofs.

   *  Audit logs.

   Extensions SHOULD use new branches, new paths, or new protocol
   versions.  They MUST NOT change the meaning of existing Canonical
   Info Paths.

Appendix A.  Design Philosophy (Non-Normative)

   PCA is built around one durable secret and many recoverable derived
   keys.  It does not try to reduce the number of keys.  It reduces the
   number of secrets that must be stored forever.

   Identity, Generation, and Vault intentionally solve different
   problems: public trust, deterministic secret generation, and
   protection of external secrets.  Keeping these domains separate is
   essential to the security and privacy model.

Appendix B.  PCA and BIP32 (Normative)

   PCA and BIP32 share the concept of a deterministic hierarchy derived
   from one seed.  BIP32 uses numeric wallet paths; PCA uses human-
   readable ASCII Canonical Info Paths.

   PCA does not replace BIP32 derivation.  It derives a 64-byte BIP32
   Master Seed under a Generation path, after which ordinary BIP32
   wallet derivation applies.

Appendix C.  OpenPGP Delayed Binding (Normative)

   Ephemeral email public keys SHOULD be represented as standard OpenPGP
   transferable public keys when delayed binding is needed.

   A parent identity signing an ephemeral email key MUST use an RFC 4880
   compatible signature type, specifically a Subkey Binding signature
   (0x18) or a Generic Certification signature (0x10).

   The signature material MUST include:

   *  Issuer Fingerprint.

   *  Signature Creation Time.

   *  Key Flags or equivalent certification semantics indicating the
      signature is for certification/binding.

   Verifiers MUST use a standard OpenPGP parser and verifier, import or
   select an out-of-band trusted parent public key, verify the signature
   chain, and accept grouping only if the parent key is trusted.

   PCA does not require email clients to automatically discover, fetch,
   or parse delayed-binding proofs.
